---
title: Language Target
status: FINAL
category: Compiler Architecture
category_code: CA
author: David Delassus
publishdate: 2022-05-04T23:26:11+02:00
weight: 1
---

# Abstract

This LEP specifies what is the targetted language of Letlang as well as its
compilation unit.

# Rationale

Letlang is a compiled language, therefore the compiler does not produce bytecode
to be interpreted by a virtual machine, and it does not interpret the Abstract
Syntax Tree directly.

The compiler produces code in a targetted compiled language that is then
assembled into a final executable.

# Specification

## Targetted language

The Letlang compiler produces **Rust**<sup>[[1]](#ref-1)</sup> code.

It was chosen because:

 - Rust's type system and language features matches well the goals of Letlang
 - The Rust compiler targets **LLVM IR**<sup>[[2]](#ref-2)</sup>, allowing
   Letlang to run on all platforms supported by LLVM<sup>[[3]](#ref-3)</sup>
 - Rust has no garbage collector, instead it relies on the borrow checker to
   keep track of objects and automatically calls their destructor when they go
   out of scope

## Compilation unit

Rust's compilation unit is the **crate**.

A crate is a tree of modules:

```rust
// root module

mod child_module {
  // ...
}

mod other_child; // located in other_child.rs or other_child/mod.rs
```

It is either:

 - a library crate: compiled to a `.rlib` file (an AR archive of machine code)
 - a binary crate: compiled to a final executable

Letlang's compilation unit is a **module**. Each Letlang file is a module:

```letlang
module "hello.world";

# ...
```

Each module is compiled to a single Rust library crate, and linked together in a
final binary crate.

> **NB:** Each Letlang module can then be used as-is in a Rust project.

## Runtime

Each Letlang module requires the Rust crate `letlang_runtime`, providing the
core features of the language:

 - Letlang's type system <sup>[[4]](#ref-4)</sup>
 - Builtin effects <sup>[[5]](#ref-5)</sup>
 - SAT solver <sup>[[5]](#ref-5)</sup>

# Rejected Ideas

## Assembly Language

There are too many CPU architecture to target, it would restrict Letlang's
availability to only one platform and operating system during development.

From a security point of view, this would be too much work to ensure memory
safety, thread safety, etc... on all targets.

## LLVM IR

While this allow the compiler to target many platform at once, this target is
still too low-level. A lot of work would be needed to ensure memory safety,
thread safety, etc...

# References

| Reference | Title | Link |
| --- | --- | --- |
| <span id="ref-1">1</span> | Rust | https://www.rust-lang.org/ |
| <span id="ref-2">2</span> | LLVM IR | https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LLVM#Intermediate_representation |
| <span id="ref-3">3</span> | LLVM | https://llvm.org/ |
| <span id="ref-4">4</span> | LEP-004: Type System | [/lep/004/](/lep/004/) |
| <span id="ref-5">5</span> | LEP-006: Side Effects | [/lep/006/](/lep/006/) |
| <span id="ref-6">6</span> | LEP-008: SAT Solver | [/lep/008/](/lep/008/) |
