---
title: "Import Resolution"
status: FINAL
category: "Compiler Architecture"
category_code: "CA"
author: "David Delassus"
publishdate: 2022-05-05T00:40:55+02:00
weight: 2
---

# Abstract

This LEP specifies how the Letlang import system works, how dependencies are
resolved during compilation, and the Rust code that is produced by the `import`
statement.

# Rationale

As specified in the LEP-001<sup>[[1]](#ref-1)</sup>, the Letlang's compilation
unit is the module. Each module produce a Rust<sup>[[2]](#ref-2)</sup> library
crate.

In order to link those crates together in a final executable, the Letlang
compiler must keep track of the dependency graph and ensure that there is no
circular dependencies.

# Specification

## Naming Convention

Every Letlang module must have a unique name. This name can be composed of
multiple parts separated by dots (`.`). Each part is composed of lowercase
letters and numbers and must start with a letter.

Examples:

 - `foo.bar.baz` will be compiled to `libllmod_foo_bar_baz.rlib`
 - `encoding.rot13` will be compiled to `libllmod_encoding_rot13.rlib`

> **NB:** There is no special meaning to the dots in the name, the developer can
> use them to indicate a module hierarchy.

## Module definition

A module is defined by a `.let` file and the `module` statement (which must
comes before all other statements):

```letlang
module "foo.bar.baz";

# ...
```

## Dependency graph resolution

Once Letlang modules has been parsed into an Abstract Syntax Tree, the compiler
starts the semantic validation of this tree. During this phase, the compiler
produce the list of crates that will be generated from those modules.

Once the complete list have been computed, the compiler organizes them into a
graph based on the `import` statements found in each module.

If an `import` statement references an unknown module, a compilation error is
thrown, and the compiler aborts.

Once the graph has been computed, the compiler looks for cycles in the graph. If
such cycles are found, a compilation error is thrown, and the compiler aborts.

This graph is a directed graph where:

 - each node of the graph represent a crate
 - each edge of the graph represent a dependency relation (from the crate to its
   dependency)

{{< mermaid >}}
graph LR;
  A --> B;
  A --> C;
  B --> D;
  C --> D;
{{< /mermaid >}}

## Compilation order

The dependency graph indicates the order in which Letlang modules must be
compiled:

 1. nodes without edges starting from it are compiled first
 2. once compiled, the nodes are removed from the graph
 3. if the graph is not empty, repeat from step 1

**Example:**

{{< columns >}}

{{< column >}}
{{< center >}}Step 1:{{< /center >}}

{{< mermaid >}}
graph LR;
  A --> B;
  A --> C;
  B --> D;
  C --> D;

style A fill:#48C78E;
{{< /mermaid >}}
{{< /column >}}

{{< column >}}
{{< center >}}Step 2:{{< /center >}}

{{< mermaid >}}
graph LR;
  B --> D;
  C --> D;

style B fill:#48C78E;
style C fill:#48C78E;
{{< /mermaid >}}
{{< /column >}}

{{< column >}}
{{< center >}}Step 3:{{< /center >}}

{{< mermaid >}}
graph LR;
  D;

style D fill:#48C78E;
{{< /mermaid >}}
{{< /column >}}

{{< /columns >}}

## Import syntax and code output

Dependencies are defined by `import` statements:

```letlang
import "foo.bar.baz";
```

This will add the namespace `baz` into the current module.

**Example:**

```letlang
import "std";

func main() -> @ok {
  std.print("hello world");
  @ok;
}
```

Imports can be aliased:

```letlang
import "foo.bar.baz" as "foo";
```

> **NB:** Aliases must contain only letters and numbers and must start with a
> letter.

The resulting Rust code is:

```rust
// import "foo.bar.baz";
extern crate llmod_foo_bar_baz;
use llmod_foo_bar_baz as baz;
```

Or if aliased:

```rust
// import "foo.bar.baz" as "foo";
extern crate llmod_foo_bar_baz;
use llmod_foo_bar_baz as foo;
```

## Module discovery

By default, the compiler will look for Letlang modules in the `src` folder
relative to the project's root. Other folders can be included, for example:

 - `./vendor/` or `./deps/`: for dependencies
 - `/usr/lib/letlang`: for the standard library (on Linux)

This is done by passing the `-I path` option to the compiler.

# Rejected Ideas

## Filesystem based modules

Python<sup>[[3]](#ref-3)</sup> and Javascript<sup>[[4]](#ref-4)</sup> both use
the filename as a basis for module discovery:

```python
from foo.bar import baz
# Expects:
# |-+ foo/
#   |-- __init__.py
#   |-+ bar/
#     |-- __init__.py
#     |-- baz.py
```

```javascript
const baz = require("./foo/bar/baz.js")
```

Decoupling the directory structure from the module definition gives more liberty
to the developer regarding code organization.

## Multiple modules per file

Elixir<sup>[[5]](#ref-5)</sup> also decouple the directory structure from module
definition. But it also allow multiple modules per file:

```elixir
defmodule Foo do
  # ...
end

defmodule Bar do
  # ...
end
```

It also supports nesting modules.

This can drasticly increase the complexity of a single source file as well as
the compiler architure.

Letlang choose simplicity: *one file* equals *one module*.

## Circular imports

**Opinion:** Circular imports are generally a bad idea that can lead to
*spaghetti code*.

Hexagonal architecture<sup>[[6]](#ref-6)</sup> with clearly defined boundaries
should be the preferred way of doing things.

It is also, at the moment, unclear in which order should compilation happen for
circular imports.

# References

| Reference | Title | Link |
| --- | --- | --- |
| <span id="ref-1">1</span> | LEP-001: Language Target | [/lep/001/](/lep/001/) |
| <span id="ref-2">2</span> | Rust | https://www.rust-lang.org/ |
| <span id="ref-3">3</span> | Python | https://www.python.org/ |
| <span id="ref-4">4</span> | Javascript | https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JavaScript |
| <span id="ref-5">5</span> | Elixir | https://elixir-lang.org |
| <span id="ref-6">6</span> | Hexagonal Architecture | https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hexagonal_architecture_(software) |
