---
title: Code Generation
status: FINAL
category: Compiler Architecture
category_code: CA
author: David Delassus
publishdate: 2022-08-23T16:00:00+02:00
weight: 3
---

# Abstract

This LEP specifies the techniques used by the compiler to generate code in the
target language.

# Rationale

After parsing the source code into an **Abstract Syntax Tree**, the compiler
needs to generate valid Rust code that can be compiled.

Multiple solutions can achieve this goal:

 - generating Rust AST
 - generating Rust source code, compiling it with `rustc`
 - generating a Cargo<sup>[[1]](#ref-1)</sup> project

# Specification

## Target Directory

Generated code is located in a folder named `.llbuild` with the following
structure:

{{< mermaid >}}
flowchart TB
  .llbuild/ --> Cargo.toml
  .llbuild/ --> modules/
  .llbuild/ --> executable/
{{< /mermaid >}}

The `Cargo.toml` file in this folder describe a Cargo workspace, whose members
are the crates located in the `modules/` and `executable/` folders.

## Module generation

Each Letlang module will be translated to a library crate.

For example, the following module:

```letlang
module example::main;

# module code
```

Will produce a crate with the following structure:

{{< mermaid >}}
flowchart LR
  .llbuild/ --> modules/
  modules/ --> lldep_example_main/
  lldep_example_main/ --> Cargo.toml
  lldep_example_main/ --> src/
  src/ --> lib.rs
{{< /mermaid >}}

## Executable generation

One of the modules is defined as a main module. This module must provide a
public `main` function.

The compiler will generate an executable crate which depends on that module. Its
role is to start the node and spawn the main process:

{{< mermaid >}}
flowchart LR
  .llbuild/ --> executable/
  executable/ --> Cargo.toml
  executable/ --> src/
  src/ --> main.rs
{{< /mermaid >}}

## Dependency resolution

Every time a module use the `import` statement, the imported module is added as
a dependency to the library crate (in the `Cargo.toml` file).

For external dependencies (standard library, external projects, ...), the
toolchain will fetch the dependency and compile the library crates in the
`.llbuild/modules/` folder accordingly.

## Generating Rust code

Using the Rust crate `askama`<sup>[[2]](#ref-2)</sup>, the compiler uses
templates to transform the Letlang AST into source-code.

Finally, the `rustfmt` binary should be executed on the output, to facilitate
debugging.

# Rejected Ideas

## Generating Rust AST

The Rust crate `rustc_ast`<sup>[[3]](#ref-3)</sup> is unstable and subject to
change.

There are too few ressources at the moment to target the AST directly.

## Calling `rustc` directly

Cargo simplifies the crate dependency management, avoiding re-inventing the
wheel.

# References

| Reference | Title | Link |
| --- | --- | --- |
| <span id="ref-1">1</span> | Cargo | https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/ |
| <span id="ref-2">2</span> | `askama` Rust crate | https://docs.rs/askama/latest/askama/ |
| <span id="ref-3">3</span> | `rustc_ast` Rust crate | https://doc.rust-lang.org/beta/nightly-rustc/rustc_ast/index.html |
