---
title: "Functions"
status: FINAL
category: "Language Design"
category_code: "LD"
author: "David Delassus"
publishdate: 2022-05-06T20:34:38+02:00
weight: 5
---

# Abstract

This LEP specifies the syntax of functions and lambda expressions (or closures).

# Rationale

Functions are the core feature of any functional language, if not every
programming language.

# Specification

## Function signature

A function must define the type of its arguments and its return value:

```letlang
func foo(a: number, b: string) -> @ok | (@error, atom) {
  # ...
}
```

This indicates to which class the function belongs to:

```letlang
foo is func[(number, string) -> @ok | (@error, atom)];
```

> **NB:** The class `func[arguments -> return]` contains every function with the
> same signature.

## Function body

The body of a function consists of a sequence of expressions. The value of the
last expression is returned:

```letlang
func double(a: number) -> number {
  a * 2;
}
```

## Generic functions

A function can take type parameters, to reduce code duplication:

```letlang
func swap<T, U>(a: T, b: U) -> (U, T) {
  (b, a);
}
```

## First class citizens

Every function can be assigned to variables and passed as arguments or returned:

```letlang
module "example.funcs";

func make_adder(a: number) -> func[(number) -> number] {
  func(b: number) -> number {
    a + b;
  };
}

func main() -> @ok {
  add_five := make_adder(5);
  assert add_five(1) = 6;
}
```

## Type checking

When a function is called, Letlang will check at runtime the type of all
supplied arguments. Before returning, Letlang will check at runtime the type of
the return value.

> **NB:** Type checking is always done at runtime. Compile-time type checking
> may also be implemented but it is not mandatory.

## Early return

The only form of *early return* is done by throwing an
exception<sup>[[1]](#ref-1)</sup>.

## Function color

Letlang functions have no color<sup>[[2]](#ref-2)</sup>. It is up to the caller
to determine if the function should be synchronous or asynchronous.

# Rejected Ideas

## Return statement

The `return` statement as a form of *early return* will not be supported.

**Opinion:** Having a **single point of return** help reduce the cognitive load
of the code.

# References


| Reference | Title | Link |
| --- | --- | --- |
| <span id="ref-1">1</span> | LEP-006: Side effects | [/lep/006/](/lep/006/) |
| <span id="ref-2">2</span> | What color is your function? | https://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/2015/02/01/what-color-is-your-function/ |